---
layout: default
title: 10. Brief Tour of the Standard Library
---

# 10. Brief Tour of the Standard Library

## 10.1. Operating System Interface

The [`os`](../library/os.html#module-os) module provides dozens of functions
for interacting with the operating system:

    
    >>> import os
    >>> os.getcwd()      # Return the current working directory
    'C:\\Python33'
    >>> os.chdir('/server/accesslogs')   # Change current working directory
    >>> os.system('mkdir today')   # Run the command mkdir in the system shell
    0
    

Be sure to use the `import os` style instead of `from os import *`. This will
keep [`os.open()`](../library/os.html#os.open) from shadowing the built-in
[`open()`](../library/functions.html#open) function which operates much
differently.

The built-in [`dir()`](../library/functions.html#dir) and
[`help()`](../library/functions.html#help) functions are useful as interactive
aids for working with large modules like [`os`](../library/os.html#module-os):

    
    >>> import os
    >>> dir(os)
    <returns a list of all module functions>
    >>> help(os)
    <returns an extensive manual page created from the module's docstrings>
    

For daily file and directory management tasks, the
[`shutil`](../library/shutil.html#module-shutil) module provides a higher
level interface that is easier to use:

    
    >>> import shutil
    >>> shutil.copyfile('data.db', 'archive.db')
    >>> shutil.move('/build/executables', 'installdir')
    

## 10.2. File Wildcards¶

The [`glob`](../library/glob.html#module-glob) module provides a function for
making file lists from directory wildcard searches:

    
    >>> import glob
    >>> glob.glob('*.py')
    ['primes.py', 'random.py', 'quote.py']
    

## 10.3. Command Line Arguments¶

Common utility scripts often need to process command line arguments. These
arguments are stored in the [`sys`](../library/sys.html#module-sys) module's
_argv_ attribute as a list. For instance the following output results from
running `python demo.py one two three` at the command line:

    
    >>> import sys
    >>> print(sys.argv)
    ['demo.py', 'one', 'two', 'three']
    

The [`getopt`](../library/getopt.html#module-getopt) module processes
_sys.argv_ using the conventions of the Unix
[`getopt()`](../library/getopt.html#module-getopt) function. More powerful and
flexible command line processing is provided by the
[`argparse`](../library/argparse.html#module-argparse) module.

## 10.4. Error Output Redirection and Program Termination¶

The [`sys`](../library/sys.html#module-sys) module also has attributes for
_stdin_, _stdout_, and _stderr_. The latter is useful for emitting warnings
and error messages to make them visible even when _stdout_ has been
redirected:

    
    >>> sys.stderr.write('Warning, log file not found starting a new one\n')
    Warning, log file not found starting a new one
    

The most direct way to terminate a script is to use `sys.exit()`.

## 10.5. String Pattern Matching¶

The [`re`](../library/re.html#module-re) module provides regular expression
tools for advanced string processing. For complex matching and manipulation,
regular expressions offer succinct, optimized solutions:

    
    >>> import re
    >>> re.findall(r'\bf[a-z]*', 'which foot or hand fell fastest')
    ['foot', 'fell', 'fastest']
    >>> re.sub(r'(\b[a-z]+) \1', r'\1', 'cat in the the hat')
    'cat in the hat'
    

When only simple capabilities are needed, string methods are preferred because
they are easier to read and debug:

    
    >>> 'tea for too'.replace('too', 'two')
    'tea for two'
    

## 10.6. Mathematics¶

The [`math`](../library/math.html#module-math) module gives access to the
underlying C library functions for floating point math:

    
    >>> import math
    >>> math.cos(math.pi / 4)
    0.70710678118654757
    >>> math.log(1024, 2)
    10.0
    

The [`random`](../library/random.html#module-random) module provides tools for
making random selections:

    
    >>> import random
    >>> random.choice(['apple', 'pear', 'banana'])
    'apple'
    >>> random.sample(range(100), 10)   # sampling without replacement
    [30, 83, 16, 4, 8, 81, 41, 50, 18, 33]
    >>> random.random()    # random float
    0.17970987693706186
    >>> random.randrange(6)    # random integer chosen from range(6)
    4
    

The SciPy project <[http://scipy.org](http://scipy.org)> has many other
modules for numerical computations.

## 10.7. Internet Access¶

There are a number of modules for accessing the internet and processing
internet protocols. Two of the simplest are
[`urllib.request`](../library/urllib.request.html#module-urllib.request) for
retrieving data from URLs and [`smtplib`](../library/smtplib.html#module-
smtplib) for sending mail:

    
    >>> from urllib.request import urlopen
    >>> for line in urlopen('http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/cgi-bin/timer.pl'):
    ...     line = line.decode('utf-8')  # Decoding the binary data to text.
    ...     if 'EST' in line or 'EDT' in line:  # look for Eastern Time
    ...         print(line)
    
    <BR>Nov. 25, 09:43:32 PM EST
    
    >>> import smtplib
    >>> server = smtplib.SMTP('localhost')
    >>> server.sendmail('soothsayer@example.org', 'jcaesar@example.org',
    ... """To: jcaesar@example.org
    ... From: soothsayer@example.org
    ...
    ... Beware the Ides of March.
    ... """)
    >>> server.quit()
    

(Note that the second example needs a mailserver running on localhost.)

## 10.8. Dates and Times¶

The [`datetime`](../library/datetime.html#module-datetime) module supplies
classes for manipulating dates and times in both simple and complex ways.
While date and time arithmetic is supported, the focus of the implementation
is on efficient member extraction for output formatting and manipulation. The
module also supports objects that are timezone aware.

    
    >>> # dates are easily constructed and formatted
    >>> from datetime import date
    >>> now = date.today()
    >>> now
    datetime.date(2003, 12, 2)
    >>> now.strftime("%m-%d-%y. %d %b %Y is a %A on the %d day of %B.")
    '12-02-03. 02 Dec 2003 is a Tuesday on the 02 day of December.'
    
    >>> # dates support calendar arithmetic
    >>> birthday = date(1964, 7, 31)
    >>> age = now - birthday
    >>> age.days
    14368
    

## 10.9. Data Compression¶

Common data archiving and compression formats are directly supported by
modules including: [`zlib`](../library/zlib.html#module-zlib),
[`gzip`](../library/gzip.html#module-gzip), [`bz2`](../library/bz2.html
#module-bz2), [`lzma`](../library/lzma.html#module-lzma),
[`zipfile`](../library/zipfile.html#module-zipfile) and
[`tarfile`](../library/tarfile.html#module-tarfile).

    
    >>> import zlib
    >>> s = b'witch which has which witches wrist watch'
    >>> len(s)
    41
    >>> t = zlib.compress(s)
    >>> len(t)
    37
    >>> zlib.decompress(t)
    b'witch which has which witches wrist watch'
    >>> zlib.crc32(s)
    226805979
    

## 10.10. Performance Measurement¶

Some Python users develop a deep interest in knowing the relative performance
of different approaches to the same problem. Python provides a measurement
tool that answers those questions immediately.

For example, it may be tempting to use the tuple packing and unpacking feature
instead of the traditional approach to swapping arguments. The
[`timeit`](../library/timeit.html#module-timeit) module quickly demonstrates a
modest performance advantage:

    
    >>> from timeit import Timer
    >>> Timer('t=a; a=b; b=t', 'a=1; b=2').timeit()
    0.57535828626024577
    >>> Timer('a,b = b,a', 'a=1; b=2').timeit()
    0.54962537085770791
    

In contrast to [`timeit`](../library/timeit.html#module-timeit)'s fine level
of granularity, the [`profile`](../library/profile.html#module-profile) and
[`pstats`](../library/profile.html#module-pstats) modules provide tools for
identifying time critical sections in larger blocks of code.

## 10.11. Quality Control¶

One approach for developing high quality software is to write tests for each
function as it is developed and to run those tests frequently during the
development process.

The [`doctest`](../library/doctest.html#module-doctest) module provides a tool
for scanning a module and validating tests embedded in a program's docstrings.
Test construction is as simple as cutting-and-pasting a typical call along
with its results into the docstring. This improves the documentation by
providing the user with an example and it allows the doctest module to make
sure the code remains true to the documentation:

    
    def average(values):
        """Computes the arithmetic mean of a list of numbers.
    
        >>> print(average([20, 30, 70]))
        40.0
        """
        return sum(values) / len(values)
    
    import doctest
    doctest.testmod()   # automatically validate the embedded tests
    

The [`unittest`](../library/unittest.html#module-unittest) module is not as
effortless as the [`doctest`](../library/doctest.html#module-doctest) module,
but it allows a more comprehensive set of tests to be maintained in a separate
file:

    
    import unittest
    
    class TestStatisticalFunctions(unittest.TestCase):
    
        def test_average(self):
            self.assertEqual(average([20, 30, 70]), 40.0)
            self.assertEqual(round(average([1, 5, 7]), 1), 4.3)
            with self.assertRaises(ZeroDivisionError):
                average([])
            with self.assertRaises(TypeError):
                average(20, 30, 70)
    
    unittest.main() # Calling from the command line invokes all tests
    

## 10.12. Batteries Included¶

Python has a "batteries included" philosophy. This is best seen through the
sophisticated and robust capabilities of its larger packages. For example:

  * The [`xmlrpc.client`](../library/xmlrpc.client.html#module-xmlrpc.client) and [`xmlrpc.server`](../library/xmlrpc.server.html#module-xmlrpc.server) modules make implementing remote procedure calls into an almost trivial task. Despite the modules names, no direct knowledge or handling of XML is needed.
  * The [`email`](../library/email.html#module-email) package is a library for managing email messages, including MIME and other RFC 2822-based message documents. Unlike [`smtplib`](../library/smtplib.html#module-smtplib) and [`poplib`](../library/poplib.html#module-poplib) which actually send and receive messages, the email package has a complete toolset for building or decoding complex message structures (including attachments) and for implementing internet encoding and header protocols.
  * The [`xml.dom`](../library/xml.dom.html#module-xml.dom) and [`xml.sax`](../library/xml.sax.html#module-xml.sax) packages provide robust support for parsing this popular data interchange format. Likewise, the [`csv`](../library/csv.html#module-csv) module supports direct reads and writes in a common database format. Together, these modules and packages greatly simplify data interchange between Python applications and other tools.
  * Internationalization is supported by a number of modules including [`gettext`](../library/gettext.html#module-gettext), [`locale`](../library/locale.html#module-locale), and the [`codecs`](../library/codecs.html#module-codecs) package.

### [Table Of Contents](../contents.html)

  * 10. Brief Tour of the Standard Library
    * 10.1. Operating System Interface
    * 10.2. File Wildcards
    * 10.3. Command Line Arguments
    * 10.4. Error Output Redirection and Program Termination
    * 10.5. String Pattern Matching
    * 10.6. Mathematics
    * 10.7. Internet Access
    * 10.8. Dates and Times
    * 10.9. Data Compression
    * 10.10. Performance Measurement
    * 10.11. Quality Control
    * 10.12. Batteries Included

#### Previous topic

[9. Classes](classes.html)

#### Next topic

[11. Brief Tour of the Standard Library - Part II](stdlib2.html)

### This Page

  * [Report a Bug](../bugs.html)
  * [Show Source](../_sources/tutorial/stdlib.txt)

### Quick search

Enter search terms or a module, class or function name.

### Navigation

  * [index](../genindex.html)
  * [modules](../py-modindex.html) |
  * [next](stdlib2.html) |
  * [previous](classes.html) |
  * ![](../_static/py.png)
  * [Python](http://www.python.org/) »
  * 3.3.3 [Documentation](../index.html) »
  * [The Python Tutorial](index.html) »

(C) [Copyright](../copyright.html) 1990-2014, Python Software Foundation.

The Python Software Foundation is a non-profit corporation. [Please
donate.](http://www.python.org/psf/donations/)

Last updated on Feb 01, 2014. [Found a bug](../bugs.html)?

Created using [Sphinx](http://sphinx.pocoo.org/) 1.2.

