---
layout: default
title: 12. What's now?
---

# 12. What Now?

Reading this tutorial has probably reinforced your interest in using Python --
you should be eager to apply Python to solving your real-world problems. Where
should you go to learn more?

This tutorial is part of Python's documentation set. Some other documents in
the set are:

  * [_The Python Standard Library_](../library/index.html#library-index):

You should browse through this manual, which gives complete (though terse)
reference material about types, functions, and the modules in the standard
library. The standard Python distribution includes a _lot_ of additional code.
There are modules to read Unix mailboxes, retrieve documents via HTTP,
generate random numbers, parse command-line options, write CGI programs,
compress data, and many other tasks. Skimming through the Library Reference
will give you an idea of what's available.

  * [_Installing Python Modules_](../install/index.html#install-index) explains how to install external modules written by other Python users.

  * [_The Python Language Reference_](../reference/index.html#reference-index): A detailed explanation of Python's syntax and semantics. It's heavy reading, but is useful as a complete guide to the language itself.

More Python resources:

  * [http://www.python.org](http://www.python.org): The major Python Web site. It contains code, documentation, and pointers to Python-related pages around the Web. This Web site is mirrored in various places around the world, such as Europe, Japan, and Australia; a mirror may be faster than the main site, depending on your geographical location.
  * [http://docs.python.org](http://docs.python.org): Fast access to Python's documentation.
  * [http://pypi.python.org](http://pypi.python.org): The Python Package Index, previously also nicknamed the Cheese Shop, is an index of user-created Python modules that are available for download. Once you begin releasing code, you can register it here so that others can find it.
  * [http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/Python/Cookbook/](http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/Python/Cookbook/): The Python Cookbook is a sizable collection of code examples, larger modules, and useful scripts. Particularly notable contributions are collected in a book also titled Python Cookbook (O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0-596-00797-3.)
  * [http://scipy.org](http://scipy.org): The Scientific Python project includes modules for fast array computations and manipulations plus a host of packages for such things as linear algebra, Fourier transforms, non-linear solvers, random number distributions, statistical analysis and the like.

For Python-related questions and problem reports, you can post to the
newsgroup _comp.lang.python_, or send them to the mailing list at [python-
list@python.org](mailto:python-list%40python.org). The newsgroup and mailing
list are gatewayed, so messages posted to one will automatically be forwarded
to the other. There are around 120 postings a day (with peaks up to several
hundred), asking (and answering) questions, suggesting new features, and
announcing new modules. Before posting, be sure to check the list of
[_Frequently Asked Questions_](../faq/index.html#faq-index) (also called the
FAQ). Mailing list archives are available at
[http://mail.python.org/pipermail/](http://mail.python.org/pipermail/). The
FAQ answers many of the questions that come up again and again, and may
already contain the solution for your problem.

#### Previous topic

[11. Brief Tour of the Standard Library - Part II](stdlib2.html)

#### Next topic

[13. Interactive Input Editing and History Substitution](interactive.html)


(C) [Copyright](../copyright.html) 1990-2014, Python Software Foundation.

The Python Software Foundation is a non-profit corporation. [Please
donate.](http://www.python.org/psf/donations/)

Last updated on Feb 01, 2014. [Found a bug](../bugs.html)?

Created using [Sphinx](http://sphinx.pocoo.org/) 1.2.

